The z/OS system libraries
are where there is a lot of
the customization data for
the operating system lives.
You'll find a lot of important
information in here,
including where to find
other important information.
So kind of important.
We've mentioned a
few of these before
during the module on IPLing a system.
I know you wanted to know
more information about
those data sets.
So here we are,
let's get started.
First up, SYS1.LINKLIB,
this contains much of
the executable code also known as
modules for z/OS
components and utilities.
In here, you'll find
the module MSTJCL00,
which contains
the initial JCL statements
that start the master
scheduler subsystem.
So that's how JES gets started.
SYS1.LPALIB.
LPALIB stands for
link pack area library.
These modules are shared by
all address spaces in the system,
and because they are read-only
and not self-modifying,
they can be used by a number of
address spaces at the same time.
There are four types of
modules you'll find in
the LPA, dynamic, fixed,
modified, pagable, and it
all comes down to how they
should be handled in memory.
SYS1.NUCLEUS contains
the basic supervisor modules
for the system,
the core of the system
that is required for it to
begin loading the full version
of the operating system.
We just recently talked
about SYS1.PROCLIB,
which is where the IBM supplied
JCL procedures for performing
system functions live,
and my favorite
SYS1.PARMLIB contains
the control parameters for
z/OS and some program products.
If you've used Linux, or Unix
based operating system before,
it's similar to what
you'd find in /etc.
So if you're looking to
increase a value from 25-30,
or change the name of
what something on
the system gets called,
chances are it's in SYS1.PARMLIB.
What makes up
a particular system is
how these system libraries
are configured.
In addition, there's
also information that
comes from other non IBM vendors,
as well as how
a particular company
chooses to set up their system.
You can organize a lot of
this customization information
into these six areas,
there's the z/OS software,
the non z/OS software,
middle ware like CICS, Db2,
non IBM software that comes from
other vendors,
customization data,
user-defined exits,
which boils down to
ways that users have customized
and extended software,
as well as user data.
When a program calls a module,
the system needs to know where
it is in order to run it,
and it has a certain order it
goes through when
searching for modules.
The first place it looks isn't
the job pack area, or JPA.
If it's not in there,
it'll look in the TASKLIB.
Next stop is
the STEPLIB, or JOBLIB.
These are specific DD names
that can be used to allocate
data sets to be searched ahead of
the default system search
order for programs.
We then hit LPA,
that linked pack area,
where it will hit the dynamic,
then the fixed, and
then the modified,
and then the pageable modules,
and then Linklist as specified in
PROGxx, and LNKLSTxx.
By default, the LINKLIST
begins with SYS1.LINKLIB,
and there's more to follow.
But you can view and change
the order in your PROGxx,
and add other libraries
to that list.
By the way, the list
of places that
the system searches for modules
is called a concatenation.
In order for modules to work,
they need to be ready to go.
It's not practical
to keep all modules
loaded in main memory
all the time.
But each time the system has
to go and look for a module,
that takes time, and it pulls
the CPU away from doing
other important stuff.
So there's this concept of
a library lookaside
facility, or LLA.
This reduces the amount
of I/O needed to
locate and fetch modules
from the DASD Storage.
LLA takes a look
at the modules and
determines which ones could
really benefit from being staged.
Similarly, there's a VLF,
or virtual lookaside facility,
which is used to store named
objects in virtual storage and
retrieve those on behalf of
users in multiple address spaces.
So let's look at how these
get set up in a few examples.
Let's start with
the LOADxx member,
which is one of
the first modules that
gets loaded in IPL time.
In here you'll see
the PARMLIB concatenation.
You can specify up to
16 partitioned data sets in here.
You can see in
this configuration,
there is a SYS0.IPLPARM,
and it will automatically
add SYS1.PARMLIB to
the end of the concatenation
even if you don't specify it.
There's also the IEASYSxx member.
Now this is where
the installation defaults go.
These are the parameters
that will not
change unless you're
altering the physical,
or logically defined environment
that your system is operating in.
If you want to see
the concatenation
without digging
through the data sets,
you can type D PARMLIB,
and it will list
them out for you.
You can also look at the IPL
information with D IPLINFO,
that will show you when
the system was last IPLed,
and what the version of
the operating system is,
and what the contents of IEASYS,
and IEASYM are. That determines
which members get loaded.
You'll also see
the IODF device number,
and the IPL device
and volume serial number,
this command is
critically important.
I can remember from
my SYSPROG days,
sometimes we'd bring up a system,
and it would just not
be behaving correctly.
Something we thought we installed
wasn't there, modules
weren't loading.
Step one is to issue a D IPLINFO,
and make sure that what you're
running is what you
think you're running.
Maybe we forgot to change
the IPL volume or change
one of those IEA members.
This is your sanity
check right here.
Each IEA member has
its own purpose and story,
and importantly, sections of
documentation describing
exactly how to use it.
We're not going to go
through them all here.
The important thing to take
away is where to
look to find them,
generally in the z/OS
system libraries,
and where to find more about them
by using the manuals
or a search engine.
I do want to show you
those IEASYMxx members
though since we've covered
the topic of symbols
a little while ago,
and I want to tie back to that.
If you look in IEASYSxx,
you'll see some of
those static system symbols
getting set like SYSNAME,
which is equal to SC04,
you can see a few other symbols
getting set in there as well.
So later on when you
want to reference
a specific data set built
specifically for that system,
we can just say LPARNAME,
&SYSNAME, and we've used a symbol.
If you ever wanted to display the
list of symbols available,
just type D SYSBOLS.
Now that symbols doesn't
sound a real word anymore,
I think it's time to move
on to the next topic.